Loki tutorial (#213)
kyma-project/examples: loki/README.md

# Installing a custom Loki stack in Kyma

## Overview

The Kyma Loki component brings limited configuration options in contrast to the upstream [loki-stack](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/loki-stack) chart. Modifications might be reset at next upgrade cycle.

An alternative can be a parallel installation of the upstream chart offering all customization options. The following instructions outline how to achieve such installation in co-existence to the Kyma stack.

> **CAUTION:** This example uses the Grafana Loki version, which is distributed under AGPL-3.0 only and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**CAUTION:** This example uses the Grafana Loki version, which is distributed under AGPL-3.0 only and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.
```

    ```bash
    helm repo add grafana https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

### Install the Loki stack

Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.
 ```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml --set promtail.enabled=false --set grafana.enabled=false
```

You can either use the [loki-values.yaml](./loki-values.yaml) provided in this `loki` folder, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own `values.yaml` file.

### Verify the installation

Check that the `loki` Pod has been created in the Namespace and is in the `Running` state:

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

### Activate log shipment using a LogPipeline

1. Download the [logpipeline](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml) and replace the `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder.

2. Apply the modified LogPipeline:

   ```bash

>    kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml
   ```
```

When the status of the applied LogPipeline resource turned into `Running`, the underlying Fluentbit is reconfigured and log shipment to your Loki instance should be active
> **NOTE:** The used output plugin configuration is using all labels of a Pod to label the Loki log streams. That segregation of the log streams might be not optimal performance wise. Follow [Loki's labelling best practices](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for a tailormade setup fitting to your workload configuration.

### Verify the setup by accessing logs via the Loki API

1. To access the Loki API, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100

## Alternative installation options

## Installation together with Grafana
The used Helm chart supports the deployment of Grafana as well, but is disabled by default. As Grafana provides a very good Loki integration, you might want to install it as well.

To deploy Grafana alongside to Loki and having Loki pre-configured as a datasource, run the following command instead of the original command from the Installation section:

```bash

> helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/grafana-values.yaml --set grafana.adminPassword=myPwd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/grafana-values.yaml --set grafana.adminPassword=myPwd
```a
For accessing the Grafana UI via kubectl port forwarding, run:
```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-grafana 3000:80
```a
Open Grafana in your browser under http://localhost:3000 and log in with user admin and the password taken from the above helm command.
```

The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API, which configures a managed Fluent Bit accordingly. Loki itself promotes its own log collector called `promtail`, which you can use alternatively. You can enable a ready-to-use setup with the following Helm command:
```bash

> helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/promtail-values.yaml --set grafana.enabled=false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/promtail-values.yaml
```

> The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API, which configures a managed Fluent Bit accordingly. Loki itself promotes its own log collector called `promtail`, which you can use alternatively. You can enable a ready-to-use setup with the following Helm command:
> ```bash
> helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/promtail-values.yaml --set grafana.enabled=false
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installation based on Promtail
Promtail is the recommended log collector to be used for feeding logs to Loki. The instructions provided her are using Kyma's LogPipeline feature based on Fluentbit.
If you prefer to use promtail, you can enable the deployment of it via the Helm chart as well.
The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API, which configures a managed Fluent Bit accordingly. Loki itself promotes its own log collector called `promtail`, which you can use alternatively. You can enable a ready-to-use setup with the following Helm command instead of using the one outlined in the installation instructions above:
```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/promtail-values.yaml
```a
```

# Installing a custom Loki stack in Kyma

## Overview

The Kyma Loki component brings limited configuration options in contrast to the upstream [loki-stack](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/loki-stack) chart. Modifications might be reset at next upgrade cycle.

An alternative can be a parallel installation of the upstream chart offering all customization options. The following instructions outline how to achieve such installation in co-existence to the Kyma stack.

> >**CAUTION:** This example uses the Grafana Loki version, which is distributed under AGPL-3.0 only and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.
> > **CAUTION:** These instructions install Loki in a lightweight setup that does not fulfil production-grade qualities. Consider using a scalable setup based on an object storage backend instead (see [Simple scalable deployment of Grafana Loki with Helm](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**CAUTION:** This example uses the Grafana Loki version, which is distributed under AGPL-3.0 only and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.

>**CAUTION:** These instructions install Loki in a lightweight setup that does not fulfil production-grade qualities. Consider using a scalable setup based on an object storage backend instead (see [Simple scalable deployment of Grafana Loki with Helm](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/)).
```

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

### Activate log shipment using a LogPipeline

1. Download the [logpipeline](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml) and replace the `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder.

2. Apply the modified LogPipeline:

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml
When the status of the applied LogPipeline resource turned into `Running`, the underlying Fluentbit is reconfigured and log shipment to your Loki instance should be active
> **NOTE:** The used output plugin configuration is using all labels of a Pod to label the Loki log streams. That segregation of the log streams might be not optimal performance wise. Follow [Loki's labelling best practices](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for a tailormade setup fitting to your workload configuration.

### Verify the setup by accessing logs via the Loki API

1. To access the Loki API, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100

## Alternative installation options

> ## Installation together with Grafana

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installation together with Grafana
```

# Installing a custom Loki stack in Kyma

## Overview

The Kyma Loki component brings limited configuration options in contrast to the upstream [loki-stack](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/loki-stack) chart. Modifications might be reset at next upgrade cycle.

An alternative can be a parallel installation of the upstream chart offering all customization options. The following instructions outline how to achieve such installation in co-existence to the Kyma stack.

**CAUTION:** This example uses the Grafana Loki version, which is distributed under AGPL-3.0 only and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.

> 

Reviewer: > **CAUTION:** These instructions install Loki in a lightweight setup that does not fulfil production-grade qualities. Consider using a scalable setup based on an object storage backend instead (see [Simple scalable deployment of Grafana Loki with Helm](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/)).
```suggestion
> **CAUTION:** These instructions install Loki in a lightweight setup that does not fulfil production-grade qualities. Consider using a scalable setup based on an object storage backend instead (see [Simple scalable deployment of Grafana Loki with Helm](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/)).

```

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

### Activate log shipment using a LogPipeline

1. Download the [logpipeline](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml) and replace the `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder.

2. Apply the modified LogPipeline:

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml
When the status of the applied LogPipeline resource turned into `Running`, the underlying Fluentbit is reconfigured and log shipment to your Loki instance should be active
> **NOTE:** The used output plugin configuration is using all labels of a Pod to label the Loki log streams. That segregation of the log streams might be not optimal performance wise. Follow [Loki's labelling best practices](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for a tailormade setup fitting to your workload configuration.

### Verify the setup by accessing logs via the Loki API

1. To access the Loki API, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100

> ### Alternative installation options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Alternative installation options
```

> The used Helm chart provides configuration for accessing logs with Grafana, which is disabled by default. 
> To enable Grafana, run:
> 
> ```bash
> helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/grafana-values.yaml --set grafana.adminPassword=myPwd --set promtail.enabled=false
> ```
> 
> To access Grafana, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
> ```bash
> kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-grafana 3000:80
> ```
> Open Grafana in your browser under http://localhost:3000 and log in with `admin` as password `myPwd`. Password can be easly changed by installation parameter `grafana.adminPassword=myPwd` from command above. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Installation together with Grafana
The used Helm chart supports the deployment of Grafana as well, but is disabled by default. As Grafana provides a very good Loki integration, you might want to install it as well.

To deploy Grafana alongside to Loki and having Loki pre-configured as a datasource, run the following command instead of the original command from the Installation section:

```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/grafana-values.yaml --set grafana.adminPassword=myPwd
```

For accessing the Grafana UI via kubectl port forwarding, run:
```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-grafana 3000:80
```

Open Grafana in your browser under `http://localhost:3000` and log in with user `admin` and the password taken from the above helm command.
```

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-grafana 3000:80
```a
Open Grafana in your browser under http://localhost:3000 and log in with user admin and the password taken from the above helm command.

### Installation based on Promtail
Promtail is the recommended log collector to be used for feeding logs to Loki. The instructions provided her are using Kyma's LogPipeline feature based on Fluentbit.
If you prefer to use promtail, you can enable the deployment of it via the Helm chart as well.
The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API, which configures a managed Fluent Bit accordingly. Loki itself promotes its own log collector called `promtail`, which you can use alternatively. You can enable a ready-to-use setup with the following Helm command instead of using the one outlined in the installation instructions above:
```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/promtail-values.yaml

> ```a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

> ### Cleanup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Cleanup
```

**CAUTION:** This example will use the Grafana Loki version which is distributed under AGPL-3.0 only and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.

## Prerequisites

- Kyma as the target deployment environment.
- Kubectl > 1.22.x
- Helm 3.x

## Installation

### Preparation

1. Export your Namespace as a variable. Replace the `{namespace}` placeholder in the following command and run it:

    ```bash
    export KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS="{namespace}"
    ```

2. Export the Helm release name that you want to use. It can be any name, but be aware that all resources in the cluster will be prefixed with that name. Replace the `{release-name}` placeholder in the following command and run it:
    ```bash
    export HELM_RELEASE_NAME="{release-name}"
    ```

3. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo add grafana https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

### Install the loki-stack

Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.
 ```bash

> helm upgrade --install -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/values.yaml

Reviewer 2: Let's add `--create-namespace` since it is not added previously or the existence of the namespace described as a prerequisite.

Reviewer: Then we should add it for kiali tutorial as well. Is it important if istio is enabled or not? I guess it is important for the push URL (http|s) so maybe we should have a prerequisite defined instead?

Reviewer 2: For Kiali we use the `--create-namespace` and enable the sidecar using the Pod label. It would work with or without Istio (here and for Kiali). The https redirect should be transparent with the istio-proxy and no changes required.

Author: `--create-namespace` parameter added for all Helm installation commands

```

You can either use the [values.yaml]('values.yaml') provided in this loki folder, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own values.yaml file.

### Verify the installation

Check that the `loki` Pod have been created in the `{namespace}` and are in the `Running` state:

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

### Install LogPipeline with custom plugin

> **NOTE:** Before applying following command, `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder should be replaced.  

Run the kubectl apply command to deploy custom LogPipeline to emmit logs to the deployed loki instance.

Command below will deploy a LogPipeline with `fluentbit` and loki plugin

 ```bash
kubectl apply -f  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml
```

### Accessing Loki and Logs

To access Loki, use kubectl port forwarding run:
```bash

> kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} portforward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100

Reviewer 2: I think it must be `port-forward`.

Author: fixed

```

Now we can access Loki over `localhost` and query collected logs.

Loki queries need a query parameter `time` in nano second resolution, to get current nano seconds in Linux or MacOS, run following command.

```bash
date +%s
```

Replace `{nanoseconds}` placeholder with result of command above and run following command to get latest logs from Loki

```bash
curl -G -s  "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query" \
  --data-urlencode \
  'query={job="fluentbit"}'
  --data-urlencode \

>   'time={nanoseconds}'

Author: unfortunately this not working

```

### Cleanup

1. To remove the installation from cluster, run:

   ```bash
   helm delete -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}
   ```

2. To remove deployed LogPipeline instance from cluster, run:
   
   ```bash
   kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml
   ```

> ### Additional

Reviewer: Please have it one level up and maybe let's call it Alternative installation options?
Then have proper sub-headlines for the topics

Author: moved to upper level

> Loki Helm chart provide configuration to accessing logs via Grafana, which by default disabled. To install Grafana to access logs add following configuration parameters to the [values.yaml]('values.yaml') and install Loki with Helm.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should also add an example for a datasource ConfigMap to integrate with an existing Grafana instance. When using our Prometheus and Loki examples at the same time, people should not use two Grafana instances.

Author: More defaults and configuration parameters added for separate values.yaml files for each component.

> Loki Helm chart provide configuration to accessing logs via Grafana, which by default disabled. To install Grafana to access logs add following configuration parameters to the [values.yaml]('values.yaml') and install Loki with Helm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The used helm chart provides configuration for accessing logs via Grafana, which is disabled by default. To enable Grafana add following configuration parameters to the used [values.yaml]('values.yaml').
```

```yaml
grafana:

>   enabled: true

Reviewer 2: I think we would also need to set an initial password for Grafana. See the Prometheus example draft: https://github.com/kyma-project/examples/pull/206/files#diff-08003481b8e8a1d4adb3290f0c62af2b63e7e544f9b4167a24f4ab1832a40daaR46

Author: Grafana configuration moved to separate values.yaml file

```

> An alternative to LogPipeline to collect logs and push to the loki, Loki Helm chart deliver log collector `promtail`, promtail disabled in this example, to enable it change [values.yaml]('values.yaml') as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API which will configure a managed Fluentbit accordingly. Loki itself promotes an own log collector called `promtail` which could be used alternatively. A ready to use setup can be enabled easily by adjusting the used [values.yaml]('values.yaml') fileas following:
```

```yaml
promtail:
  enabled: true
```

> This example demonstrate basic installation and capabilities of loki with Kyma, for more stable and production grade setup please consult [here]('https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **NOTE:** Following the described instructions will install Loki in a very lightweight setup which will not fullfill production-grade criterias. Please consider to use a scalable setup based on an object storage backend as described in this [guide](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/).
```

    ```bash
    export HELM_RELEASE_NAME="{release-name}"
    ```

3. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo add grafana https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

### Install the Loki stack

Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.
 ```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml --set promtail.enabled=false --set grafana.enabled=false
```

You can either use the [loki-values.yaml](./loki-values.yaml) provided in this `loki` folder, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own `values.yaml` file.

### Verify the installation

Check that the `loki` Pod has been created in the Namespace and is in the `Running` state:

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

> ### Install LogPipeline with custom plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Activate log shipment using a LogPipeline
```

> **NOTE:** Before applying following command, `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder should be replaced.  

> 2. To deploy a custom LogPipeline to emit logs to the deployed Loki instance, run the kubectl `apply` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Apply the modified LogPipeline:
```

   ```bash

>    kubectl apply -f  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml
```

> **NOTE:** Installed LogPipeline by default will collect all kubernetes labels for collected logs. Please consider to use best practices described in this [guide](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for best experience with Loki.

### Accessing Loki and Logs

> 1. To access Loki, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
>    ```bash
>    kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100
> 
>    Now you can access Loki over `localhost` and query the collected logs.
> 
> 2. Loki queries need a query parameter `time` in nano second resolution. To get the current nano seconds in Linux or MacOS, run:
> 
>    ```bash
>    date +%s
> 
> 3. To get the latest logs from Loki, replace the `{nanoseconds}` placeholder with the result of the previous command, and run:
> 
>    ```bash
>    curl -G -s  "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query" \
>      --data-urlencode \
>      'query={job="fluentbit"}'
>      --data-urlencode \
>      'time={nanoseconds}'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To access the Loki API, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100
   ```

   Now you can access the Loki API over `localhost` and query the collected logs.

1. A Loki query needs to provide the `time` in nano seconds as a query parameter. To get the current nano seconds on Linux or MacOS, run:

   ```bash
   date +%s
   ```

1. To get the latest logs from the Loki API, replace the `{nanoseconds}` placeholder with the result of the previous command, and run:

   ```bash
   curl -G -s  "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query" \
     --data-urlencode \
     'query={job="fluentbit"}'
     --data-urlencode \
     'time={nanoseconds}'
```

    ```bash
    export HELM_RELEASE_NAME="{release-name}"
    ```

3. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo add grafana https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

### Install the Loki stack

Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.
```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml --set promtail.enabled=false --set grafana.enabled=false
```

You can either use the [loki-values.yaml](./loki-values.yaml) provided in this `loki` folder, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own `values.yaml` file.

### Verify the installation

Check that the `loki` Pod has been created in the Namespace and is in the `Running` state:

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

### Activate log shipment using a LogPipeline

> 1. Download the [logpipeline](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml) and replace the `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder.

Reviewer 3: This link seems broken: 

<img width="871" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76950046/197816688-92b333bc-62d9-4e66-a9c0-a43d596a8ffb.png">

Reviewer 4: Yes it doesn't exist yet because it will be introduced with this PR (see files). Don't know how we usually handle this, but I temporary removed the link and will create another PR after this one to introduce it.

Reviewer 3: aaaah 🤦 
Thank you!

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml
   ```
   
When the status of the applied LogPipeline resource turned into `Running`, the underlying Fluentbit is reconfigured and log shipment to your Loki instance should be active

> **NOTE:** The used output plugin configuration is using all labels of a Pod to label the Loki log streams. That segregation of the log streams might be not optimal performance wise. Follow [Loki's labelling best practices](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for a tailormade setup fitting to your workload configuration.

### Verify the setup by accessing logs via the Loki API

1. To access the Loki API, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100
   ```
1. Loki queries need a query parameter `time` in nano second resolution. To get the current nano seconds in Linux or MacOS, run:
   ```bash
   date +%s
   ```
1. To get the latest logs from Loki, replace the `{nanoseconds}` placeholder with the result of the previous command, and run:
   ```bash
   curl -G -s  "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query" \
     --data-urlencode \

>      'query={job="fluentbit"}'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     'query={job="fluentbit"}' \
```

You can either use the [loki-values.yaml](./loki-values.yaml) provided in this loki folder, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own values.yaml file.

### Verify the installation

Check that the `loki` Pod have been created in the `{namespace}` and are in the `Running` state:

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-0
```

### Install LogPipeline with custom plugin

> **NOTE:** Before applying following command, `{release-name}` and `{namespace}` placeholder should be replaced.  

Run the kubectl apply command to deploy custom LogPipeline to emmit logs to the deployed loki instance.

Command below will deploy a LogPipeline with `fluentbit` and loki plugin

 ```bash
kubectl apply -f  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/logpipeline-custom.yaml
```

> **NOTE:** Installed LogPipeline by default will collect all kubernetes labels for collected logs. Please consider to use best practices described in this [guide](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for best experience with Loki.

### Accessing Loki and Logs

To access Loki, use kubectl port forwarding run:

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: blanks for proper indentation in numbered list

```suggestion
```bash
   ```

> kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} 3100
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   ```
```

Now we can access Loki over `localhost` and query collected logs.

> Loki queries need a query parameter `time` in nano second resolution, to get current nano seconds in Linux or MacOS, run following command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Loki queries need a query parameter `time` in nano second resolution. To get the current nano seconds in Linux or MacOS, run:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: again, indentation

```suggestion
   ```bash
```

> date +%s

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   date +%s
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   ```
```

> Replace `{nanoseconds}` placeholder with result of command above and run following command to get latest logs from Loki

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. To get the latest logs from Loki, replace the `{nanoseconds}` placeholder with the result of the previous command, and run:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: blanks for indentation

```suggestion
   ```bash
```

> curl -G -s  "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query" \

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   curl -G -s  "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/query" \
```

>   --data-urlencode \

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     --data-urlencode \
```

>   'query={job="fluentbit"}'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     'query={job="fluentbit"}'
```

>   --data-urlencode \

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     --data-urlencode \
```

>   'time={nanoseconds}'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     'time={nanoseconds}'
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   ```
```

### Alternative installation options

> 

Reviewer 3: If all the instructions under this headline are alternatives to each other, we should format them as bullet list.
If they are subsequent steps, use a numbered list.

How many alternative installation options are there? Is every one of the following instructions one alternative? Or is the entire set of instructions the one alternative? If that's the case, this headline should be more specific and tell exactly what the alternative is.

Author: In the example we showing, how you can install Loki with LogPipeline and accessing logs via Loki API.
With alternative installation
1- An alternative to the LogPipeline in this case Promtail installation
2- Accessing logs via API, as alternative Grafana installation

But you are right we have to structure more meaningfully to avoid confusion

> The used helm chart provides configuration for accessing logs via Grafana, which is disabled by default. To enable Grafana run:

Reviewer 3: "used" where?  Is enabling Grafana a prerequisite for a certain procedure? For which procedure?

```suggestion
The used Helm chart provides configuration for accessing logs with Grafana, which is disabled by default. 
To enable Grafana, run:
```

```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/grafana-values.yaml --set grafana.adminPassword=myPwd --set promtail.enabled=false
```

> To access Grafana, use kubectl port forwarding run:

Reviewer 3: Is this an alternative to the instruction in line 98? It's not subsequent step, right?

```suggestion
To access Grafana, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:
```

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-grafana 3000:80
```

> Open Grafana in your browser under http://localhost:3000 and log in with `admin` as password `myPwd`. Password can be easly changed by installation parameter `grafana.adminPassword=myPwd` from command above. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open Grafana in your browser under http://localhost:3000 and log in with `admin` as password `myPwd`. To change the password, adjust the installation parameter `grafana.adminPassword=myPwd` in the previous command. 
```

Oh, this looks like a subsequent step to the instruction in line 104? Did I misunderstand? Are the instructions in this section not alternatives, but steps that follow each other? I'm confused now.

> The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API which will configure a managed Fluentbit accordingly. Loki itself promotes an own log collector called `promtail` which could be used alternatively. A ready to use setup can be enabled easily by using following Helm command:

Reviewer 3: which proposed approach? 

Is this an introductory sentence for the entire section under "Alternative onstallation options", or does this introduce the sentences in line 111 etc? 

 ```suggestion
The proposed approach is based Kyma's LogPipeline API, which configures a managed Fluent Bit accordingly. Loki itself promotes its own log collector called `promtail`, which you can use alternatively. You can enable a ready-to-use setup with the following Helm command:
```

```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/promtail-values.yaml --set grafana.enabled=false
```

> > **NOTE:** Following the described instructions will install Loki in a very lightweight setup which will not fullfill production-grade criterias. Please consider to use a scalable setup based on an object storage backend as described in this [guide](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/).

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this restriction be at the beginning of the affected instructions?? 
Do we want to let users perform all the steps and afterwards let them notice it's not what they want?

I strongly suggest putting this text before the affected instructions.

```suggestion
> **NOTE:** These instructions install Loki in a very lightweight setup that does not fulfil production-grade criteria. Consider using a scalable setup based on an object storage backend (see [Simple scalable deployment of Grafana Loki with Helm](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/installation/simple-scalable-helm/)).
```

["criteria" is already plural; the singular would be "criterion".](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/criteria)

# Installing a custom Loki stack in Kyma

## Overview

> In contrast to the upstream [loki-stack chart](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/loki-stack), Kyma's Loki component offers limited configuration options. Furthermore, any modifications you make might be reset at next upgrade cycle.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
>**NOTE:** In contrast to the upstream [loki-stack chart](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/loki-stack), Kyma's Loki component offers limited configuration options. Furthermore, any modifications you make might be reset at the next upgrade cycle.
```
It looks like sth that'd fit into a NOTE :)

  <details>
  <summary label="promtail-installation">
  Installation with Promtail
  </summary>

To install the Loki stack based on Promtail, run:

```bash
helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml
```
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary label="fluent-bit-installation">
  Installation with Kyma's LogPipeline
  </summary>

>**CAUTION:** This setup uses an unsupported output plugin for the LogPipline. Support for this might be removed in future.

1. To install the Loki stack with Kyma's LogPipeline feature based on Fluent Bit, run:

   ```bash
   helm upgrade --install --create-namespace -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} ${HELM_RELEASE_NAME} grafana/loki-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/loki/loki-values.yaml --set promtail.enabled=false
   ```

2. Download the [LogPipeline](logpipeline-custom.yaml) and replace the `{HELM_RELEASE_NAME}` and `{NAMESPACE}` placeholder.

3. Apply the modified LogPipeline:

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f logpipeline-custom.yaml
   ```

> When the status of the applied LogPipeline resource turned into `Running`, the underlying Fluent Bit is reconfigured and log shipment to your Loki instance is active.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When the status of the applied LogPipeline resource turns into `Running`, the underlying Fluent Bit is reconfigured and log shipment to your Loki instance is active.
```

> > **TIP:** The used output plugin configuration uses all labels of a Pod to label the Loki log streams. Performancewise, such segregation of the log streams might be not optimal. Follow [Loki's labelling best practices](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/best-practices/) for a tailormade setup that fits your workload configuration.

Reviewer: That tip is valid for all three scenarios and should be moved below the tabs

     ```

  2. To access the Grafana UI with kubectl port forwarding, run:

     ```bash
     kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}-grafana 3000:80
     ```

  3. Open Grafana in your browser under `http://localhost:3000` and log in with user admin and the password taken from the previous Helm command.
  
  </details>
</div>

### Verify the installation

Check that the `loki` Pod has been created in the Namespace and is in the `Running` state:

```bash
kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} get pod -l app=loki,release=${HELM_RELEASE_NAME}
```

### Verify the setup by accessing logs using the Loki API

1. To access the Loki API, use kubectl port forwarding. Run:

   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} port-forward svc/$(kubectl  get svc -n ${KYMA_LOKI_EXAMPLE_NS} -l app=loki,release=${HELM_RELEASE_NAME},variant=headless -ojsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}') 3100
   ```

> 1. Loki queries need a query parameter `time`, provided in nano seconds. To get the current nano seconds in Linux or MacOS, run:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Loki queries need a query parameter **time**, provided in nanoseconds. To get the current nanoseconds in Linux or macOS, run:
```
According to [our guidelines](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/blob/main/docs/guidelines/content-guidelines/03-formatting.md#use-bold-font-for-these-items) we use bolding when we talk about parameters. Unless it's not the case here.
